Add blog post - Implement custom source connector for Table API and SQL (#460)
apache/flink-web: _posts/2021-08-16-connector-table-sql-api-part2.md

- write [Flink SQL](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-release-1.13/docs/dev/table/sql/overview/) and execute the queries in the Ververica Platform

You are encouraged to follow along with the code in this [repository](github.com/Airblader/blog-imap). It provides a boilerplate project that also comes with a bundled [docker-compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) setup that lets you easily run the connector. You can then try it out with Flink’s SQL client.

# Prerequisites

This tutorial assumes that you have:

- followed the steps outlined in [part one](#) of this tutorial
- some familiarity with Java and objected-oriented programming

# Understand how to fetch emails via the IMAP protocol

Now that you have a working source connector that can run on Flink, it is time to connect to an email server via IMAP (an Internet protocol that allows email clients to retrieve messages from a mail server) so that Flink can process emails instead of test static data.  

You will use [Jakarta Mail](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/mail/), a Java library that can be used to send and receive email via IMAP. For simplicity, authentication will use a plain username and password.

> This tutorial will focus more on how to implement a connector for Flink. If you want to learn more about the details of how IMAP or Jakarta Mail work, you are encouraged to explore a more extensive implementation at this [repository](github.com/Airblader/flink-connector-email). 

Reviewer: The correct link has changed to `github.com/TNG/flink-connector-email` now.

# Add configuration options - server information and credentials

In order to connect to your IMAP server, you will need at least the following:

- hostname (of the mail server)
- port number
- username
- password

You will start by creating a class to encapsulate the configuration options. You will make use of [Lombok](https://projectlombok.org/setup/maven) to help with some boilerplate code. By adding the `@Data` and `@Builder` annotations, Lombok will generate these for all the fields of the immutable class. 

```java
@Data
@Builder
public class ImapSourceOptions implements Serializable {
    private static final long serialVersionUID = 1L;

    private final String host;
    private final Integer port;
    private final String user;
    private final String password;
}
```

Now you can add an instance of this class to the `ImapSourceFunction` and `ImapTableSource` classes so it can be used there. Take note of the column names with which the table has been created. This will help later.

> // QUESTION: what would the column names be here??

Reviewer: For example, with the SQL executed in the first part:

```
CREATE TABLE T (subject STRING, content STRING) WITH ('connector' = 'imap');
```

… the column names would be "subject" and "content".

```java
public class ImapSourceFunction extends RichSourceFunction<RowData> {
    private final ImapSourceOptions options;
    private final List<String> columnNames;

    public ImapSourceFunction(
        ImapSourceOptions options, 
        List<String> columnNames
    ) {
        this.options = options;
        this.columnNames = columnNames.stream()
            .map(String::toUpperCase)
            .collect(Collectors.toList());
    }

    // ...
}
```

```java
public class ImapTableSource implements ScanTableSource {

    private final ImapSourceOptions options;
    private final List<String> columnNames;

    public ImapTableSource(
        ImapSourceOptions options,
        List<String> columnNames
    ) {
        this.options = options;
        this.columnNames = columnNames;
    }

    // …

    @Override
    public ScanRuntimeProvider getScanRuntimeProvider(ScanContext ctx) {
        final ImapSourceFunction sourceFunction = new ImapSourceFunction(options, columnNames);
        return SourceFunctionProvider.of(sourceFunction, true);
    }

    @Override
    public DynamicTableSource copy() {
        return new ImapTableSource(options, columnNames);
    }

    // …
}
```

> Finally, in the `ImapTableSourceFactory` class, you need to create a `ConfigOption<Type>Name` for the hostname, port number, username, and password.  Then you need to report them to Flink. Since all of the current options are mandatory, you can add them to the `requiredOptions()` method in order to do this. 

Reviewer: `ConfigOption<Type>Name` looks a bit odd to me, I'm not even sure what the "Name" in there stands for. `ConfigOption<>` would probably be easier to understand?

// why would you want to do the latter??

```java
public class ImapTableSourceFactory implements DynamicTableSourceFactory {

    // ...

    @Override
    public DynamicTableSource createDynamicTableSource(Context ctx) {
        final FactoryUtil.TableFactoryHelper factoryHelper = FactoryUtil.createTableFactoryHelper(this, ctx);
        factoryHelper.validate();

        final ImapSourceOptions options = ImapSourceOptions.builder()
            .host(factoryHelper.getOptions().get(HOST))
            .port(factoryHelper.getOptions().get(PORT))
            .user(factoryHelper.getOptions().get(USER))
            .password(factoryHelper.getOptions().get(PASSWORD))
            .build();

>         final List<String> columnNames = ctx.getCatalogTable().getResolvedSchema().getColumnNames();

Reviewer 2: actually we should use `toPhysicalDataType` to erase computed columns and time attributes, but the problem in this tutorial is actually that it mixes the concepts of metadata columns and physical columns. so it uses physical columns as a replacement for metadata columns. `(RowType) ctx.getCatalogTable().getResolvedSchema().toPhysicalRowDataType().getLogicalType().getFieldNames()` but this is not very nice for an example :(

Reviewer: I discussed this offline with @twalthr. In the interest of finding a balance between "correctness" and brevity, let's change this to this:

```
        final List<String> columnNames = ctx.getCatalogTable().getResolvedSchema().getColumns().stream()
            .filter(Column::isPhysical)
            .map(Column::getName)
            .collect(Collectors.toList());
```

Additionally we should add an explanation that ideally we'd be making use of connector metadata instead (with a link), but that we'll keep it simple here instead and maybe refer again to github.com/TNG/flink-connector-email which does implement this using metadata now.

        return new ImapTableSource(options, columnNames);
    }
}
```

To test these new configuration options, run:

```sh
$ cd testing/
$ ./build_and_run.sh
```

Once you see the Flink SQL client start up, execute the following statements to create a table with your connector:

```sql
CREATE TABLE T (subject STRING, content STRING) WITH ('connector' = 'imap');

SELECT * FROM T;
```

This time it will fail because the required options are not provided.  

```
[ERROR] Could not execute SQL statement. Reason:
org.apache.flink.table.api.ValidationException: One or more required options are missing.

Missing required options are:

host
password
user
``` 

#  Connect to the source email server

Now that you have configured the required options to connect to the email server, it is time to actually connect to the server. 

Going back to the `ImapSourceFunction` class, you first need to convert the options given to the table source into a `Properties` object, which is what you can pass to the Jakarta library. You can also set various other properties here as well (i.e. enabling SSL).

> // is there more information on this properties object??

Reviewer: `Properties` is a standard Java language class, which is just a key-value map. The specific properties Jakarta understands are documented [here](https://jakarta.ee/specifications/mail/1.6/apidocs/index.html?com/sun/mail/imap/package-summary.html).

Now create a method (`connect()`) which sets up the connection:

```java 
public class ImapSourceFunction extends RichSourceFunction<RowData> {
    // …

    private transient Store store;
    private transient IMAPFolder folder;

    private void connect() throws Exception {
        var session = Session.getInstance(getSessionProperties(), null);
        store = session.getStore();
        store.connect(options.getUser(), options.getPassword());

        var genericFolder = store.getFolder("INBOX");
        folder = (IMAPFolder) genericFolder;

        if (!folder.isOpen()) {
            folder.open(Folder.READ_ONLY);
        }
    }
}
```

You can now use this method to connect to the mail server when the source is created. Create a loop to keep the source running while collecting email counts. Lastly, implement methods to cancel and close the connection:

```java
public class ImapSourceFunction extends RichSourceFunction<RowData> {
    private transient volatile boolean running = false;

    // …

    @Override
    public void run(SourceFunction.SourceContext<RowData> ctx) throws Exception {
        connect();
        running = true;

        // TODO: Listen for new messages

>         while (running) {

Reviewer 2: mention that our source is not checkpointable, so no state fault tolerance will be possible

                    row.setField(i, TimestampData.fromInstant(message.getReceivedDate().toInstant()));
                    break;
                // ...
            }
        }

        ctx.collect(row);
    }
```

You should now have a working source that we can select any of the columns from which we support. We can try it out once again, but this time specifying all the columns we support above:

```sql
CREATE TABLE T (
    subject STRING,
    sent TIMESTAMP(3),
    received TIMESTAMP(3)
) WITH (
    'connector' = 'imap', 
    'host' = 'greenmail',
    'port' = '3143', 
    'user' = 'alice', 
    'password' = 'alice'
);

SELECT * FROM T;
```

Use the command from earlier to send emails to the greenmail server and you should see them appear. You can also try selecting only some of the columns, or write more complex queries. Note, however, that there are quite a few more things we haven’t covered here, such as advancing watermarks.

# Test the connector with a real mail server on the Ververica Platform 

If you want to test the connector with a real mail server, you can import it into [Ververica Platform Community Edition](https://www.ververica.com/getting-started). 

> Since our example connector in this blog post is still a bit limited, we’ll actually use github.com/Airblader/flink-connector-imap instead this time. We’ll also assume you already have Ververica Platform up and running (see the link above).

Reviewer: Rename this to flink-connector-email and convert it into a link. The correct link has also changed now to `github.com/TNG/flink-connector-email`.

> In this case, I will be connecting to a GMail account. This requires SSL, and comes with an additional caveat that you either need to enable unsafe apps (which tends to deactivate itself again frequently), or enable two-factor authentication and create an app password (this is more stable, and more safe). 

Reviewer: Suddenly "I"?

Author: Sorry.....I didn't actually finish converting the very end of this tutorial yet but I wanted to commit what I have so far for a quick review.  Should have maybe omitted that part or given a heads up.  My bad.

---
layout: post
title:  "Implementing a custom source connector for Table API and SQL - Part Two "
date: 2021-08-27T00:00:00.000Z
authors:
- Ingo Buerk:
  name: "Ingo Buerk"
excerpt: 
---

{% toc %}

# Introduction

> In [part one](#) of this tutorial, you learned how to build a custom source connector for Flink. In part two, you will learn how to integrate the connector with a test email inbox through the IMAP protocol, filter out emails, and execute [Flink SQL on the Ververica Platform](https://www.ververica.com/apache-flink-sql-on-ververica-platform). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In [part one](/2021/08/27/connector-table-sql-api-part2) of this tutorial, you learned how to build a custom source connector for Flink. In part two, you will learn how to integrate the connector with a test email inbox through the IMAP protocol, filter out emails, and execute [Flink SQL on the Ververica Platform](https://www.ververica.com/apache-flink-sql-on-ververica-platform). 
```

(However, the link might change again if we change the dates)

# Goals

Part two of the tutorial will teach you how to: 

- integrate a source connector which connects to a mailbox using the IMAP protocol
- use [Jakarta Mail](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/mail/), a Java library that can send and receive email via the IMAP protocol  
- write [Flink SQL](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-release-1.13/docs/dev/table/sql/overview/) and execute the queries in the Ververica Platform

> You are encouraged to follow along with the code in this [repository](github.com/TNG/flink-connector-email). It provides a boilerplate project that also comes with a bundled [docker-compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) setup that lets you easily run the connector. You can then try it out with Flink’s SQL client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You are encouraged to follow along with the code in this [repository](https://github.com/Airblader/blog-imap). It provides a boilerplate project that also comes with a bundled [docker-compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) setup that lets you easily run the connector. You can then try it out with Flink’s SQL client.
```

# Prerequisites

This tutorial assumes that you have:

> - followed the steps outlined in [part one](#) of this tutorial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- followed the steps outlined in [part one](/2021/08/27/connector-table-sql-api-part1) of this tutorial
```

(However, the links might change again if we change the dates)

- some familiarity with Java and objected-oriented programming

# Understand how to fetch emails via the IMAP protocol

Now that you have a working source connector that can run on Flink, it is time to connect to an email server via [IMAP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet_Message_Access_Protocol) (an Internet protocol that allows email clients to retrieve messages from a mail server) so that Flink can process emails instead of test static data.  

You will use [Jakarta Mail](https://eclipse-ee4j.github.io/mail/), a Java library that can be used to send and receive email via IMAP. For simplicity, authentication will use a plain username and password.

> This tutorial will focus more on how to implement a connector for Flink. If you want to learn more about the details of how IMAP or Jakarta Mail work, you are encouraged to explore a more extensive implementation at this [repository](github.com/TNG/flink-connector-email). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial will focus more on how to implement a connector for Flink. If you want to learn more about the details of how IMAP or Jakarta Mail work, you are encouraged to explore a more extensive implementation at this [repository](https://github.com/TNG/flink-connector-email). 
```

In order to fetch emails, you will need to connect to the email server, register a listener for new emails and collect them whenever they arrive, and enter a loop to keep the connector running. 

# Add configuration options - server information and credentials

In order to connect to your IMAP server, you will need at least the following:

- hostname (of the mail server)
- port number
- username
- password

> You will start by creating a class to encapsulate the configuration options. You will make use of [Lombok](https://projectlombok.org/setup/maven) to help with some boilerplate code. By adding the `@Data` and `@SuperBuilder` annotations, Lombok will generate these for all the fields of the immutable class. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will start by creating a class to encapsulate the configuration options. You will make use of [Lombok](https://projectlombok.org) to help with some boilerplate code. By adding the `@Data` and `@SuperBuilder` annotations, Lombok will generate these for all the fields of the immutable class. 
```

```java
import lombok.Data;
import lombok.experimental.SuperBuilder;
import javax.annotation.Nullable;
import java.io.Serializable;

@Data
@SuperBuilder(toBuilder = true)
public class ImapSourceOptions implements Serializable {
    private static final long serialVersionUID = 1L;

    private final String host;

>     private final @Nullable Long port;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    private final @Nullable Integer port;
```

    private final @Nullable String user;
    private final @Nullable String password;
}
```

Now you can add an instance of this class to the `ImapSource` and `ImapTableSource` classes previously created (in part one) so it can be used there. Take note of the column names with which the table has been created. This will help later.

<div class="note">
  <h5>Hint</h5>
  <p>The column names would be "subject" and "content" with the SQL executed in part one:

>      CREATE TABLE T (subject STRING, content STRING) WITH ('connector' = 'imap');

Reviewer: This doesn't get formatted the way I think you intended it to:

![screenshot-2021-08-31_11-24-21](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2392216/131477862-a1cce1f1-b4e4-436e-bf5d-979e550efc11.png)

I couldn't find the `.note` class being used anywhere, and it doesn't seem to do anything either. Where is this idea from? 

If we change this to

```
<div class="note">
  <h5>Hint</h5>
  <p>The column names would be "subject" and "content" with the SQL executed in part one:</p>
  <pre><code class="language-sql">CREATE TABLE T (subject STRING, content STRING) WITH ('connector' = 'imap');</code></pre>
</div>
```

and add the following at the end of `css/flink.css`:

```
.note {
    border-left: 2px solid #ccc;
    padding: 4px 0 4px 8px;
    margin-bottom: 32px;
}

.note > h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6 {
    margin-top: initial;
    padding-top: initial;
}
```

… then we get this. It isn't much or the greatest, but it's something.

![screenshot-2021-08-31_12-35-58](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2392216/131488363-ac47f3ed-9f02-4bf0-98d6-4b446468f7b0.png)

  </p>
</div>

```java
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.source.RichSourceFunction;
import org.apache.flink.table.data.RowData;

> import java.util.List;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import java.util.List;
import java.util.stream.Collectors;
```

public class ImapSource extends RichSourceFunction<RowData> {
    private final ImapSourceOptions options;
    private final List<String> columnNames;

>     public ImapSourceFunction(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    public ImapSource(
```

        ImapSourceOptions options, 
        List<String> columnNames
    ) {
        this.options = options;
        this.columnNames = columnNames.stream()
            .map(String::toUpperCase)
            .collect(Collectors.toList());
    }

    // ...
}
```

```java
import org.apache.flink.table.connector.source.DynamicTableSource;
import org.apache.flink.table.connector.source.ScanTableSource;
import java.util.List;

public class ImapTableSource implements ScanTableSource {

    private final ImapSourceOptions options;
    private final List<String> columnNames;

    public ImapTableSource(
        ImapSourceOptions options,
        List<String> columnNames
    ) {
        this.options = options;
        this.columnNames = columnNames;
    }

    // …

    @Override
    public ScanRuntimeProvider getScanRuntimeProvider(ScanContext ctx) {

>         final ImapSourceFunction sourceFunction = new ImapSourceFunction(options, columnNames);
>         return SourceFunctionProvider.of(sourceFunction, true);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        final ImapSource source = new ImapSource(options, columnNames);
        return SourceFunctionProvider.of(source, true);
```

    }

    @Override
    public DynamicTableSource copy() {
        return new ImapTableSource(options, columnNames);
    }

    // …
}
```

> Finally, in the `ImapSourceFactory` class, you need to create a `ConfigOption<>` for the hostname, port number, username, and password.  Then you need to report them to Flink. Since all of the current options are mandatory, you can add them to the `requiredOptions()` method in order to do this. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, in the `ImapSourceFactory` class, you need to create a `ConfigOption<>` for the hostname, port number, username, and password.  Then you need to report them to Flink. Host, user, and password are mandatory and can be added to `requiredOptions()`; the port is optional and can be added to `optionalOptions()` instead.
```

```java

> import org.apache.flink.configuration.ConfigOption;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import org.apache.flink.configuration.ConfigOption;
import org.apache.flink.configuration.ConfigOptions;
```

import org.apache.flink.table.factories.DynamicTableSourceFactory;

import java.util.HashSet;
import java.util.Set;

public class ImapSourceFactory implements DynamicTableSourceFactory {

    public static final ConfigOption<String> HOST = ConfigOptions.key("host").stringType().noDefaultValue();
    public static final ConfigOption<Integer> PORT = ConfigOptions.key("port").intType().noDefaultValue();
    public static final ConfigOption<String> USER = ConfigOptions.key("user").stringType().noDefaultValue();
    public static final ConfigOption<String> PASSWORD = ConfigOptions.key("password").stringType().noDefaultValue();

    // …

    @Override
    public Set<ConfigOption<?>> requiredOptions() {
        final Set<ConfigOption<?>> options = new HashSet<>();
        options.add(HOST);

>         options.add(PORT);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

        options.add(USER);
        options.add(PASSWORD);
        return options;
    }

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

    @Override
    public Set<ConfigOption<?>> optionalOptions() {
        final Set<ConfigOption<?>> options = new HashSet<>();
        options.add(PORT);
        return options;
    }
```

    // …
}
```

Now take a look at the `createDynamicTableSource()` function in the `ImapSourceFactory` class.  Recall that previously (in part one) you had created a small helper utility [TableFactoryHelper](https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-master/api/java/org/apache/flink/table/factories/FactoryUtil.TableFactoryHelper.html), that Flink offers which ensures that required options are set and that no unknown options are provided. You can now use it to automatically make sure that the required options of hostname, port number, username, and password are all provided when creating a table using this connector. The helper function will throw an error message if one required option is missing. You can also use it to access the provided options (`getOptions()`), convert them into an instance of the `ImapTableSource` class created earlier, and provide the instance to the table source:

```java

> import org.apache.flink.table.factories.DynamicTableSourceFactory;
> import org.apache.flink.table.factories.FactoryUtil;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import java.util.List;
import java.util.stream.Collectors;
import org.apache.flink.table.factories.DynamicTableSourceFactory;
import org.apache.flink.table.factories.FactoryUtil;
import org.apache.flink.table.catalog.Column;
```

public class ImapSourceFactory implements DynamicTableSourceFactory {

    // ...

    @Override
    public DynamicTableSource createDynamicTableSource(Context ctx) {
        final FactoryUtil.TableFactoryHelper factoryHelper = FactoryUtil.createTableFactoryHelper(this, ctx);
        factoryHelper.validate();

        final ImapSourceOptions options = ImapSourceOptions.builder()
            .host(factoryHelper.getOptions().get(HOST))
            .port(factoryHelper.getOptions().get(PORT))
            .user(factoryHelper.getOptions().get(USER))
            .password(factoryHelper.getOptions().get(PASSWORD))
            .build();

        final List<String> columnNames = ctx.getCatalogTable().getResolvedSchema().getColumns().stream()
            .filter(Column::isPhysical)
            .map(Column::getName)
            .collect(Collectors.toList());

        return new ImapTableSource(options, columnNames);
    }
}
```
<div class="note">
  <h5>Hint</h5>
  <p>

>     Ideally, you would use connector <a href="https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-release-1.13/docs/connectors/table/overview/#metadata">metadata</a> for column names. You can refer again to the accompanying <a href="github.com/TNG/flink-connector-email">repository</a> which does implement this using metadata fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Ideally, you would use connector <a href="https://ci.apache.org/projects/flink/flink-docs-release-1.13/docs/connectors/table/overview/#metadata">metadata</a> instead of column names. You can refer again to the accompanying <a href="https://github.com/TNG/flink-connector-email">repository</a> which does implement this using metadata fields.
```

```java
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.source.RichSourceFunction;
import org.apache.flink.table.data.RowData;
import java.util.Properties;

public class ImapSource extends RichSourceFunction<RowData> {
   // …

   private Properties getSessionProperties() {
        Properties props = new Properties();
        props.put("mail.store.protocol", "imap");
        props.put("mail.imap.auth", true);
        props.put("mail.imap.host", options.getHost());
        if (options.getPort() != null) {
            props.put("mail.imap.port", options.getPort());
        }

        return props;
    }
}
```

Now create a method (`connect()`) which sets up the connection:

```java 
import jakarta.mail.*;
import com.sun.mail.imap.IMAPFolder;
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.source.RichSourceFunction;
import org.apache.flink.table.data.RowData;

public class ImapSource extends RichSourceFunction<RowData> {
    // …

    private transient Store store;
    private transient IMAPFolder folder;

    private void connect() throws Exception {

>         var session = Session.getInstance(getSessionProperties(), null);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        final Session session = Session.getInstance(getSessionProperties(), null);
```

        store = session.getStore();
        store.connect(options.getUser(), options.getPassword());

>         var genericFolder = store.getFolder("INBOX");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        final Folder genericFolder = store.getFolder("INBOX");
```

        folder = (IMAPFolder) genericFolder;

        if (!folder.isOpen()) {
            folder.open(Folder.READ_ONLY);
        }
    }
}
```

You can now use this method to connect to the mail server when the source is created. Create a loop to keep the source running while collecting email counts. Lastly, implement methods to cancel and close the connection:

```java
import jakarta.mail.*;

> import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.source.RichSourceFunction;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.source.RichSourceFunction;
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.source.SourceFunction;
```

```java
import jakarta.mail.*;
import jakarta.mail.event.MessageCountAdapter;
import jakarta.mail.event.MessageCountEvent;
import org.apache.flink.streaming.api.functions.source.RichSourceFunction;
import org.apache.flink.table.data.GenericRowData;
import org.apache.flink.table.data.RowData;

public class ImapSource extends RichSourceFunction<RowData> {
    @Override
    public void run(SourceFunction.SourceContext<RowData> ctx) throws Exception {
        // …

        folder.addMessageCountListener(new MessageCountAdapter() {
            @Override
            public void messagesAdded(MessageCountEvent e) {
                collectMessages(ctx, e.getMessages());
            }
        });

        // …
    }

    private void collectMessages(SourceFunction.SourceContext<RowData> ctx, Message[] messages) {
        for (Message message : messages) {
            try {
                ctx.collect(GenericRowData.of(StringData.fromString(message.getSubject())));
            } catch (MessagingException ignored) {}
        }
    }
}
```

Now build the project again and start up the SQL client:

```sh
$ cd testing/
$ ./build_and_run.sh
```

> This time, you will connect to a [GreenMail server](https://greenmail-mail-test.github.io/greenmail/) which is started as part of the [setup](https://github.com/TNG/flink-connector-email/blob/master/testing/docker-compose.yaml):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This time, you will connect to a [GreenMail server](https://greenmail-mail-test.github.io/greenmail/) which is started as part of the [setup](https://github.com/Airblader/blog-imap/blob/master/testing/docker-compose.yaml):
```

```sql
CREATE TABLE T (
    subject STRING
) WITH (
    'connector' = 'imap', 
    'host' = 'greenmail',
    'port' = '3143', 
    'user' = 'alice', 
    'password' = 'alice'
);

SELECT * FROM T;
```

The query above should now run continuously but no rows will be produced since it is a test server. You need to first send an email to the server. If you have [mailx](https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/mailx.html) installed, you can do so by executing in your terminal:

```sh

> $ echo "This is the email body" | mailx -Sv15-compat \
>         -s"Email Subject" \
>         -Smta=imap: \
>         alice@acme.org
> 

Reviewer: I'm not sure where this command came from, but it doesn't work. Here's what I had in my Google Doc and verified again to work:

```suggestion
$ echo "This is the email body" | mailx -Sv15-compat \
        -s"Email Subject" \
        -Smta="smtp://alice:alice@localhost:3025" \
        alice@acme.org
```

```

The row “Email Subject” should now have appeared as a row in your output. Your source connector is working!

However, since you are still hard-coding the schema produced by the source, defining the table with a different schema will produce errors. You want to be able to define which fields of an email interest you and then produce the data accordingly. To do this, you will use the list of column names from earlier and then look at it when you collect the emails. 

```java

> public class ImapSource extends RichSourceFunction<RowData> {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import org.apache.flink.table.data.GenericRowData;
import org.apache.flink.table.data.RowData;
import org.apache.flink.table.data.TimestampData;

public class ImapSource extends RichSourceFunction<RowData> {
```

    private void collectMessages(SourceFunction.SourceContext<RowData> ctx, Message[] messages) {
        for (Message message : messages) {
            try {
                collectMessage(ctx, message);
            } catch (MessagingException ignored) {}
        }
    }

    private void collectMessage(SourceFunction.SourceContext<RowData> ctx, Message message)
        throws MessagingException {

>         var row = new GenericRowData(columnNames.size());

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        final RowData row = new GenericRowData(columnNames.size());
```

                    row.setField(i, TimestampData.fromInstant(message.getReceivedDate().toInstant()));
                    break;
                // ...
            }
        }

        ctx.collect(row);
    }
}
```

You should now have a working source where you can select any of the columns that are supported. Try it out again in the SQL client, but this time specifying all the columns ("subject", "sent", "received") supported above:

```sql
CREATE TABLE T (
    subject STRING,
    sent TIMESTAMP(3),
    received TIMESTAMP(3)
) WITH (
    'connector' = 'imap', 
    'host' = 'greenmail',
    'port' = '3143', 
    'user' = 'alice', 
    'password' = 'alice'
);

SELECT * FROM T;
```

Use the `mailx` command from earlier to send emails to the GreenMail server and you should see them appear. You can also try selecting only some of the columns, or write more complex queries. 

# Test the connector with a real mail server on the Ververica Platform 

If you want to test the connector with a real mail server, you can import it into [Ververica Platform Community Edition](https://www.ververica.com/getting-started). To begin, make sure that you have the Ververica Platform up and running. 

> Since the example connector in this blog post is still a bit limited, you will use the finished connector in this [repository](github.com/TNG/flink-connector-email) instead. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the example connector in this blog post is still a bit limited, you will use the finished connector in this [repository](github.com/TNG/flink-connector-email) instead. You can clone that repository and build it the same way to obtain the JAR file.
```

> For this example, let's connect to a Gmail account. This requires SSL and comes with an additional caveat that you either need to enable unsafe apps (which tends to deactivate itself again frequently), or enable two-factor authentication and create an application password (which is more stable and safe). 

Reviewer: I was thinking about this again; since someone reading along would likely do this with their real email account, I think we should not even mention allowing unsafe app access.

```suggestion
For this example, let's connect to a Gmail account. This requires SSL and comes with an additional caveat that you need to enable two-factor authentication and create an application password to use instead of your real password.
```

> First, head to SQL → Connectors. There you can create a new connector by uploading your JAR file. The platform will detect the connector options automatically. Afterwards, go back to the SQL Editor and you should now be able to use the connector.

Reviewer: We should probably add a screenshot here as well. I've quickly taken this one, maybe needs some cropping, but otherwise should be usable:

![screenshot-2021-08-31_12-59-18](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2392216/131491098-52d3cec9-5acf-4c7c-ac3a-e1ba74668c12.png)
